doc/blog: add multi-tenant post (#1235)
ariga/atlas: doc/website/blog/2022-10-27-multi-tenant-support.mdx

---
title: Migrate Multi-Tenant Environments With Atlas
authors: a8m
tags: [atlas, migrations, versioned, multi-tenant]
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

Wikipedia defines [Multi-tenancy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multitenancy) as:
> a software architecture in which a single instance of software runs on a server
> and serves multiple tenants.
In recent years, multitenancy has become a common topic in our industry as many organizations provide service
to multiple customers using the same infrastructure. Multitenancy usually becomes an issue in software
architecture because tenants usually expect a decent level of isolation from one another.

In this post, I will go over different known approaches for achieving multi-tenancy

> and discuss the approach we chose to build [Ariga's cloud platform](https://ariga.io).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and discuss the approach we took to build [Ariga's cloud platform](https://ariga.io).
```

In addition, I will demonstrate how we added built-in support for multi-tenant
environments in Atlas to overcome some of the challenges we faced.

### Introduction

Throughout the last few years, I have had the opportunity to implement multi-tenancy in various ways. Some of them
might be familiar to you:

> 1. A separate environment (deployment) per tenant. Isolation is achieved at both the compute and data layers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A separate environment (deployment) per tenant, where isolation is achieved at both the compute and data layers.
```

> 2. A schema (named database) per tenant; One environment for compute (e.g., a K8S cluster), but tenants are stored

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. A schema (named database) per tenant, where there is one environment for compute (e.g., a K8S cluster), but tenants are stored
```

in different databases or schemas. Isolation is achieved at the data layer while compute resources are shared.

> 3. One environment for all tenants, including the data layer. Typically, each table holds a `tenant_id` column that is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. One environment for all tenants, including the data layer. Typically, in this case, each table holds a `tenant_id` column that is
```

used to filter statements by the tenant. Both data and compute layers are shared, with isolation achieved at
the logical, database query level.

Each approach has pros and cons, but I want to briefly list the main reasons we chose to build
our cloud platform based on the second option: schema per tenant.

> 1. **Management**: easily delete, backup tenants, and allow them to export their data without affecting others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Management**: Easily delete, backup tenants, and allow them to export their data without affecting others.
```

2. **Isolation**: Limit credentials, connection pooling, and quotas per tenant. This way, one tenant cannot cause the
database to choke and interrupt other tenants in case they share the same physical database.
3. **Security and data privacy**: In case it is required, some tenants can be physically separated from others.

> e.g., data can be stored in the tenant's AWS account, and the application can connect to it using a secure connection,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, data can be stored in the tenant's AWS account, and the application can connect to it using a secure connection,
```

like VPC peering in AWS.
4. **Code-maintenance**: Most of the application code is written in a way that it is unaware of the multi-tenancy. In our case,

> there is one layer "at the top" that attaches the tenant-connection to the context, and the API layer (e.g., GraphQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there is one layer "at the top" that attaches the tenant connection to the context, and the API layer (e.g., GraphQL
```

resolver) extracts the connection from the context to read/write data. As a result, we are not concerned that API
changes will cross tenant boundaries.

> 5. **Migration**: schema changes can be executed first on _"test tenants"_ and _fail-fast__ in case of error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. **Migration**: Schema changes can be executed first on _"test tenants"_ and _fail-fast__ in case of error.
```

> Of course, there are also cons to this approach, but the primary one was that there was no elegant way to execute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The primary con to this approach was that there was no elegant way to execute
```

> migration on multiple databases (N times) in Atlas, but also in other tools. In the rest of the post, I'll cover

Reviewer: ```suggestion
migrations on multiple databases (N times) in Atlas. In the rest of the post, I'll cover
```
"But also in other tools" sounded weird here.

multi-tenant environments. The first is the `for_each` meta-argument that allows defining a single `env` block that
is expanded to _N_ instances, one for each tenant. For example:

```hcl title="atlas.hcl"
variable "url" {
  type    = string
  default = "mysql://root:pass@:3306/"
}

variable "tenants" {
  type = list(string)
}

env "local" {
  for_each = toset(var.tenants)
  url      = urlsetpath(var.url, each.value)
  migration {
    dir = "file://migrations"
  }
}
```

The above configuration expects a list of tenants to be provided as a variable. This can be useful when the list of
tenants is dynamic and can be injected into the Atlas command. The `urlsetpath` function is a helper function that sets
the path of the database URL to the tenant name. For example, if `url` is set to `mysql://root:pass@:3306/?param=value`
and the tenant name is `tenant1`, the resulting URL will be `mysql://root:pass@:3306/tenant1?param=value`.

The second capability is [_Data Sources_](/atlas-schema/projects#data-sources). This option enables users to retrieve
information stored in an external service or database. For the sake of this example, let's extend the configuration

> above to use the SQL data-source to retrieve the list of tenants from the _INFORMATION_SCHEMA_ in MySQL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
above to use the SQL data source to retrieve the list of tenants from the _INFORMATION_SCHEMA_ in MySQL:
```

4\. Run Atlas to execute the migration scripts on the tenants' databases:

```
atlas migrate apply --env local
```

```text title="tenant_a8m"
Migrating to version 20220811074314 (2 migrations in total):

  -- migrating version 20220811074144
    -> CREATE TABLE `users` (`id` int NOT NULL) CHARSET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_0900_ai_ci;
  -- ok (36.803179ms)

  -- migrating version 20220811074314
    -> ALTER TABLE `users` ADD COLUMN `name` varchar(255) NOT NULL;
  -- ok (26.184177ms)

  -------------------------
  -- 72.899146ms
  -- 2 migrations
  -- 2 sql statements
```
```text title="tenant_rotemtam"
Migrating to version 20220811074314 (2 migrations in total):

  -- migrating version 20220811074144
    -> CREATE TABLE `users` (`id` int NOT NULL) CHARSET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_0900_ai_ci;
  -- ok (61.987153ms)

  -- migrating version 20220811074314
    -> ALTER TABLE `users` ADD COLUMN `name` varchar(255) NOT NULL;
  -- ok (24.656515ms)

  -------------------------
  -- 95.233384ms
  -- 2 migrations
  -- 2 sql statements
```

Running the command again will not execute any migrations:

```shell
No migration files to execute
No migration files to execute
```

### Migration logging

> At Ariga, our services print structured logs (JSON) feed our observability tools. That is why we felt obligated to add

Reviewer: Weird sentence. 
I would write something like: 
"At Ariga, our services print structured logs (JSON) into our observability tools".

support for custom log formatting in Atlas. To continue the example from above, we present how we configure Atlas to

> emit JSON lines with the tenant name attach to them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
emit JSON lines with the tenant name attached to them.
```

{"Applied":[{"Applied":["CREATE TABLE `pets` (`id` bigint, PRIMARY KEY (`id`));"],"Description":"create_pets","End":"2022-10-27T16:03:03.787476+03:00","Name":"20221027125605_create_pets.sql","Start":"2022-10-27T16:03:03.757463+03:00","Version":"20221027125605"}],"Current":"20220811074314","Dir":"migrations","Driver":"mysql","End":"2022-10-27T16:03:03.787476+03:00","Pending":[{"Description":"create_pets","Name":"20221027125605_create_pets.sql","Version":"20221027125605"}],"Start":"2022-10-27T16:03:03.748399+03:00","Target":"20221027125605","Tenant":"tenant_rotemtam","URL":{"ForceQuery":false,"Fragment":"","Host":":3308","OmitHost":false,"Opaque":"","Path":"/tenant_rotemtam","RawFragment":"","RawPath":"","RawQuery":"parseTime=true","Schema":"tenant_rotemtam","Scheme":"mysql","User":{}}}
```

### Next steps

Currently, Atlas uses a _fail-fast_ policy, which means the process exits on the first tenant that returns an error.
We built it this way because we find it helpful to execute migrations first on _"test tenants"_ and stop in case the operation fails on

> any of them. However, this means the execution is serial and may be slow in case there are a high amount of tenants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
any of them. However, this means the execution is serial and may be slow in cases where there is a large amount of tenants.
```
